 
ANNEX 4 
GUIDANCE ON THE PREPARATION OF 
SAFETY DATA SHEETS (SDS) 
A4.1 
Introduction 
A4.1.1 
This annex provides guidance on the preparation of an SDS under the requirements of the Globally 
Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (GHS). SDS’s are an important element of hazard 
communication in the GHS, as explained in chapter 1.5. Use of this guidance document should support compliance with 
competent authority requirements and should allow the SDS to be prepared in accordance with the GHS. 
A4.1.2 
The use of this guidance document is dependent on importing countries requirements for SDS. It is 
hoped that the application of the GHS worldwide will eventually lead to a fully harmonized situation. 
A4.1.3 
Unless otherwise stated, all chapters, sections and tables referred to in this annex can be found in the 
main text of the GHS. 
A4.2 
General guidance for compiling an SDS 
A4.2.1 
Scope and application 
Safety Data Sheets (SDS) should be produced for all substances and mixtures which meet the 
harmonized criteria for physical, health or environmental hazards under the GHS and for all mixtures which contain 
ingredients that meet the criteria for carcinogenic, toxic to reproduction or target organ toxicity in concentrations 
exceeding the cut-off limits for SDS specified by the criteria for mixtures (see table 1.5.1 in chapter 1.5). The competent 
authority may also require SDS for mixtures not meeting the criteria for classification as hazardous, but which contain 
hazardous ingredients in certain concentrations (see chapter 3.2). The competent authority may also require SDS for 
substances or mixtures that meet the criteria for classification as hazardous for non-GHS classes/end-points. An SDS is a 
well-accepted and effective method for the provision of information and may be used to convey information for substances 
or mixtures that do not meet or are not included in the GHS classification criteria. 
A4.2.2 
General guidance 
A4.2.2.1 
The writer of the SDS needs to keep in mind that an SDS must inform its audience of the hazards of a 
substance or a mixture and provide information on the safe storage, handling and disposal of the substance or a mixture. 
An SDS contains information on the potential health effects of exposure and how to work safely with the substance or 
mixture. It also contains hazard information derived from physicochemical properties or environmental effects, on the 
use, storage, handling and emergency response measures related to that substance or mixture. The purpose of this guidance 
is to ensure consistency and accuracy in the content of each of the mandatory headings required under GHS, so that the 
resulting safety data sheets will enable users to take the necessary measures relating to protection of health and safety at 
the workplace, and the protection of the environment. The information in the SDS shall be written in a clear and concise 
manner. The SDS shall be prepared by a competent person who shall take into account the specific needs of the user 
audience, as far as it is known. Persons placing substances and mixtures on the market shall ensure that refresher courses 
and training on the preparation of SDS be regularly attended by the competent persons. 
A4.2.2.2 
When writing the SDS, information should be presented in a consistent and complete form, with the 
workplace audience firmly in mind. However, it should be considered that all or part of the SDS can be used to inform 
workers, employers, health and safety professionals, emergency personnel, relevant government agencies, as well as 
members of the community. 
A4.2.2.3 
Language used in the SDS should be simple, clear and precise, avoiding jargon, acronyms and 
abbreviations. Vague and misleading expressions should not be used. Phrases such as “may be dangerous”, “no health 
effects”, “safe under most conditions of use”, or “harmless” are also not recommended. It may be that information on 
certain properties is of no significance or that it is technically impossible to provide; if so, the reasons for this must be 
clearly stated under each heading. If it is stated that a particular hazard does not exist, the safety data sheet should clearly 
differentiate between cases where no information is available to the classifier, and cases where negative test results are 
available. 
- 410 - 
A4.2.2.4 
The date of issue of the SDS should be stated and be very apparent. The date of issue is the date the 
SDS version was made public. This generally occurs shortly after the SDS authoring and publishing process is completed. 
Revised SDS’s should clearly state the date of issue as well as a version number, revision number, supersedes date or 
some other indication of what version is replaced. 
A4.2.3 
SDS format 
A4.2.3.1 
The information in the SDS should be presented using the following 16 headings in the order given 
below (see also 1.5.3.2.1): 
1. 
Identification; 
2. 
Hazard identification; 
3. 
Composition/information on ingredients; 
4. 
First-aid measures; 
5. 
Fire-fighting measures; 
6. 
Accidental release measures; 
7. 
Handling and storage; 
8. 
Exposure controls/personal protection; 
9. 
Physical and chemical properties; 
10. 
Stability and reactivity; 
11. 
Toxicological information; 
12. 
Ecological information; 
13. 
Disposal considerations; 
14. 
Transport information; 
15. 
Regulatory information; 
16. 
Other information 
A4.2.3.2 
An SDS is not a fixed length document. The length of the SDS should be commensurate with the hazard 
of the material and the information available. 
A4.2.3.3 
All pages of an SDS should be numbered and some indication of the end of the SDS should be given 
(for example: “page 1 of 3”). Alternatively, number each page and indicate whether there is a page following (e.g. 
“Continued on next page” or “End of SDS”). 
A4.2.4 
SDS content 
A4.2.4.1 
General information on SDS content can be found in 1.5.3.3. More practical information is given below. 
A4.2.4.2 
The minimum information outlined in section A4.3 of this annex should be included on the SDS, where 
applicable and available1, under the relevant headings. When information is not available or lacking this should be clearly 
stated. The SDS should not contain any blanks. 
A4.2.4.3 
In addition, the SDS should contain a brief summary/conclusion of the data given, making it easy even 
for non-experts in the field to identify all the hazards for the hazardous substance/mixture. 
A4.2.4.4 
Use of abbreviations is not recommended because they may lead to confusion or decreased 
understanding. 
A4.2.5 
Other information requirements 
A4.2.5.1 
There are information requirements for the preparation of an SDS. The minimum information 
requirements are outlined in A4.3. 
A4.2.5.2 
In addition to the minimum information requirements (see A4.2.4.2), the SDS may also contain 
“additional information”. Where a material has additional relevant and available information about its nature and/or use, 
that information should be included in the SDS (see A4.3.16 for further advice on additional information requirements). 
 
1 Where “applicable” means where the information is applicable to the specific product covered by the SDS. Where 
“available” means where the information is available to the supplier or other entity that is preparing the SDS. 
- 411 - 
A4.2.6 
Units 
Numbers and quantities should be expressed in units appropriate to the region into which the product is 
being supplied. In general, the International System of Units (SI) should be used. 
A4.3 
Information requirements for the preparation of the SDS 
This section describes the GHS information requirements for SDS’s. Additional information may be 
required by competent authorities. 
A4.3.1 
SECTION 1: Identification 
Identify the substance or mixture and provide the name of the supplier, recommended uses and the 
contact detail information of the supplier including an emergency contact in this section. 
A4.3.1.1 
GHS product identifier 
The identity of the substance or mixture (GHS product identifier) should be exactly as found on the 
label. If one generic SDS is used to cover several minor variants of a substance or mixture, all names and variants should 
be listed on the SDS or the SDS should clearly delineate the range of substances included. 
A4.3.1.2 
Other means of identification 
In addition, or as an alternative, to the GHS product identifier, the substance or mixture may be 
identified by alternative names, numbers, company product codes, or other unique identifiers. Provide other names or 
synonyms by which the substance or mixture is labelled or commonly known, if applicable. 
A4.3.1.3 
Recommended use of the chemical and restrictions on use 
Provide the recommended or intended use of the substance or mixture, including a brief description of 
what it actually does, e.g. flame retardant, anti-oxidant, etc. Restrictions on use should, as far as possible, be stated 
including non-statutory recommendations by the supplier. 
A4.3.1.4 
Supplier’s details 
The name, full address and phone number(s) of the supplier should be included on the SDS. 
A4.3.1.5 
Emergency phone number 
References to emergency information services should be included in all SDS. If any restrictions apply, 
such as hours of operation (e.g. Monday - Friday, 8:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m., or 24 hours) or limits on specific types of 
information (e.g. medical emergencies, or transportation emergencies), this should be clearly stated. 
A4.3.2 
SECTION 2: Hazard identification 
This section describes the hazards of the substance or mixture and the appropriate warning information 
(signal word, hazard statement(s) and precautionary statement(s)) associated with those hazards. The section should 
include a brief summary/conclusion of the data given as described in A4.2.4.3. 
A4.3.2.1 
Classification of the substance or mixture 
A4.3.2.1.1 
This subsection indicates the hazard classification of the substance or mixture. 
A4.3.2.1.2 
If the substance or mixture is classified in accordance with Parts 2, 3 and/or 4 of the GHS, generally the 
classification is communicated by providing the appropriate hazard class and category/subcategory to indicate the hazard 
(for example, flammable liquid Category 1 and skin corrosive, Category 1A). However, when classification is 
differentiated within a hazard class and results in unique hazard statements, then the classification should also reflect that 
differentiation. For example, the route of exposure differentiates the acute toxicity classification as follows: acute oral 
toxicity Category 1, acute dermal toxicity Category 1 and acute inhalation toxicity Category 1. If a substance or mixture 
is classified into more than one category in a hazard class that is differentiated, then all classifications should be 
communicated. 
- 412 - 
A4.3.2.2 
GHS label elements, including precautionary statements 
A4.3.2.2.1 
Based on the classification, provide the appropriate label elements: signal word(s), hazard statement(s) 
and precautionary statement(s). 
A4.3.2.2.2 
Pictograms (or hazard symbols) may be provided as a graphical reproduction of the symbols in black 
and white or the name of the symbol, e.g. “flame”, “skull and crossbones”. 
A4.3.2.3 
Other hazards which do not result in classification 
Provide information on other hazards which do not result in classification but may contribute to the 
overall hazards of the material, for example, formation of air contaminants during hardening or processing, dust explosion 
hazards, suffocation, freezing or environmental effects such as hazards to soil-dwelling organisms. To communicate 
combustible dust hazards, and thus a potential risk of dust explosions under the approach described in annex 11 in a 
standardized manner, competent authorities may allow the use of the phrases identified in A11.2.7.3 on labels, SDSs 
and/or in operating instructions or may leave the choice to the manufacturer or supplier. 
A4.3.3 
SECTION 3: Composition/information on ingredients 
Identify the ingredient(s) of the product in this section. This includes identifying impurities and 
stabilizing additives which are themselves classified and which contribute to the classification of the substance. This 
section may also be used to provide information on complex substances. 
NOTE: 
For information on ingredients, the competent authority rules for confidential business information take 
priority over the rules for product identification. When applicable, indicate that confidential information about the 
composition was omitted. 
A4.3.3.1 
Substances 
A4.3.3.1.1 
Chemical identity of the substance 
The identity of a substance is provided by its common chemical name. The chemical name can be 
identical to the GHS product identifier. 
NOTE: 
The “common chemical name” may, for example, be the CAS name or IUPAC name, as applicable. 
A4.3.3.1.2 
Common name(s), synonym(s) of the substance 
Common names and synonyms should be provided where appropriate. 
A4.3.3.1.3 
CAS number and other unique identifiers for the substance 
The Chemical Abstract Service (CAS) registry number provides a unique chemical identification and 
should be provided when available. Other unique identifiers specific to a country or region, such as the European 
Community (EC) number could be added. 
A4.3.3.1.4 
Impurities and stabilizing additives which are themselves classified and which contribute to the 
classification of the substance 
Identify any impurities and/or stabilizing additives, which are themselves classified and which 
contribute to the classification of the substance. 
A4.3.3.2 
Mixtures 
A4.3.3.2.1 
For a mixture, provide the chemical identity, identification number (within the meaning of A4.3.3.1.3) 
and concentration or concentration ranges of all hazardous ingredients, which are hazardous to health or the environment 
within the meaning of the GHS, and are present above their cut-off levels. Manufacturers or suppliers may choose to list 
all ingredients, including non-hazardous ingredients. 
- 413 - 
A4.3.3.2.2 
The concentrations of the ingredients of a mixture should be described as: 
(a) 
exact percentages in descending order by mass or volume; or 
(b) 
ranges of percentages in descending order by mass or volume if such ranges are acceptable to 
the appropriate competent national authority. 
A4.3.3.2.3 
When using a proportion range, the health and environmental hazard effects should describe the effects 
of the highest concentration of each ingredient, provided that the effects of the mixture as a whole are not available. 
NOTE: 
The “proportion range” refers to the concentration or percentage range of the ingredient in the mixture. 
A4.3.4 
SECTION 4: First-aid measures 
This section describes the initial care that can be given by an untrained responder without the use of 
sophisticated equipment and without a wide selection of medications available. If medical attention is required, the 
instructions should state this, including its urgency. It may be useful to provide information on the immediate effects, by 
route of exposure, and indicate the immediate treatment, followed by possible delayed effects with specific medical 
surveillance required. 
A4.3.4.1 
Description of necessary first-aid measures 
A4.3.4.1.1 
Provide first-aid instructions by relevant routes of exposure. Use sub-headings to indicate the procedure 
for each route (e.g. inhalation, skin, eye and ingestion). Describe expected immediate and delayed symptoms. 
A4.3.4.1.2 
Provide advice whether: 
(a) 
immediate medical attention is required and if delayed effects can be expected after exposure; 
(b) 
movement of the exposed individual from the area to fresh air is recommended; 
(c) 
removal and handling of clothing and shoes from the individual is recommended; and 
(d) 
personal protective equipment (PPE) for first-aid responders is recommended. 
A4.3.4.2 
Most important symptoms/effects, acute and delayed 
Provide information on the most important symptoms/effects, acute and delayed, from exposure. 
A4.3.4.3 
Indication of immediate medical attention and special treatment needed, if necessary 
Where appropriate, provide information on clinical testing and medical monitoring for delayed effects, 
specific details on antidotes (where they are known) and contraindications. 
A4.3.5 
SECTION 5: Fire-fighting measures 
This section covers the requirements for fighting a fire caused by the substance or mixture or arising in 
its vicinity. 
A4.3.5.1 
Suitable extinguishing media 
Provide information on the appropriate extinguishing media. In addition, indicate whether any 
extinguishing media are inappropriate for a particular situation involving the substance or mixture (e.g. avoid high 
pressure media which could cause the formation of a potentially explosible dust-air mixture). 
A4.3.5.2 
Specific hazards arising from the chemical 
Provide advice on specific hazards that may arise from the chemical, such as hazardous combustion 
products that form when the substance or mixture burns. For example: 
(a) 
“may produce toxic fumes of carbon monoxide if burning”; or 
- 414 - 
(b) 
“produces oxides of sulphur and nitrogen on combustion”. 
A4.3.5.3 
Special protective actions for fire-fighters 
A4.3.5.3.1 
Provide advice on any protective actions to be taken during fire fighting. For example, “keep containers 
cool with water spray”. 
A4.3.6 
SECTION 6: Accidental release measures 
This section recommends the appropriate response to spills, leaks, or releases in order to prevent or 
minimize the adverse effects on persons, property and the environment in this section. Distinguish between responses for 
large and small spills where the spill volume has a significant impact on the hazard. The procedures for containment and 
recovery may indicate that different practices are required. 
A4.3.6.1 
Personal precautions, protective equipment and emergency procedures 
A4.3.6.1.1 
For non-emergency personnel 
Provide advice related to accidental spills and release of the substance or mixture such as: 
(a) 
the wearing of suitable protective equipment (including personal protective equipment, see 
section 8 of the SDS) to prevent any contamination of skin, eyes and personal clothing; 
(b) 
removal of ignition sources and provision of sufficient ventilation; and 
(c) 
emergency procedures such as the necessity to evacuate the danger area or to consult an expert. 
A4.3.6.1.2 
For emergency responders 
Provide advice related to suitable fabric for personal protective clothing (e.g.: “appropriate: Butylene; 
not appropriate: PVC). 
A4.3.6.2 
Environmental precautions 
Provide advice on any environmental precautions related to accidental spills and release of the substance 
or mixture, such as keeping away from drains, surface and ground water. 
A4.3.6.3 
Methods and materials for containment and cleaning up 
A4.3.6.3.1 
Provide appropriate advice on how to contain and clean up a spill. Appropriate containment techniques 
may include: 
(a) 
bunding2, covering of drains; and 
(b) 
capping procedures3. 
A4.3.6.3.2 
Appropriate clean up procedures may include: 
(a) 
neutralization techniques; 
(b) 
decontamination techniques; 
(c) 
adsorbent materials; 
(d) 
cleaning techniques; 
 
2 A bund is a provision of liquid collection facilities which, in the event of any leak or spillage from tanks or pipe work, 
will capture well in excess of the volume of liquids held, e.g. an embankment. Bunded areas should drain to a capture 
tank which should have facilities for water/oil separation. 
3 i.e. providing a cover or protection (e.g. to prevent damage or spillage). 
- 415 - 
(e) 
vacuuming techniques; and 
(f) 
equipment required for containment/clean up (include the use of non-sparking tools and 
equipment where applicable). 
A4.3.6.3.3 
Provide any other issues relating to spills and releases. For example, including advice on inappropriate 
containment or clean up techniques. 
A4.3.7 
SECTION 7: Handling and storage 
This section provides guidance on safe handling practices that minimize the potential hazards to people, 
property and the environment from the substance or mixture. Emphasize precautions that are appropriate to the intended 
use and to the unique properties of the substance or mixture. 
A4.3.7.1 
Precautions for safe handling 
A4.3.7.1.1 
Provide advice that: 
(a) 
allows safe handling of the substance or mixture; 
(b) 
prevents handling of incompatible substances or mixtures; 
(c) 
draws attention to operations and conditions which create new risks by altering the properties of 
the substance or mixture, and to appropriate countermeasures; and 
(d) 
minimizes the release of the substance or mixture to the environment. 
A4.3.7.1.2 
It is good practice to provide advice on general hygiene. For example: 
(a) 
“eating, drinking and smoking in work areas is prohibited”; 
(b) 
“wash hands after use”; and 
(c) 
“remove contaminated clothing and protective equipment before entering eating areas”. 
A4.3.7.2 
Conditions for safe storage, including any incompatibilities 
Ensure that the advice provided is consistent with the physical and chemical properties in section 9 
(Physical and chemical properties) of the SDS. If relevant, provide advice on specific storage requirements including: 
(a) 
How to avoid: 
(i) 
explosive atmospheres; 
(ii) 
corrosive conditions; 
(iii) 
flammability hazards; 
(iv) 
incompatible substances or mixtures; 
(v) 
evaporative conditions; and 
(vi) 
potential ignition sources (including electrical equipment). 
(b) 
How to control the effects of: 
(i) 
weather conditions; 
(ii) 
ambient pressure; 
(iii) 
temperature; 
- 416 - 
(iv) 
sunlight; 
(v) 
humidity; and 
(vi) 
vibration. 
(c) 
How to maintain the integrity of the substance or mixture by the use of: 
(i) 
stabilizers; and 
(ii) 
anti-oxidants. 
(d) 
Other advice including: 
(i) 
ventilation requirements; 
(ii) 
specific designs for storage rooms/vessels; 
(iii) 
quantity limits under storage conditions (if relevant); and 
(iv) 
packaging compatibilities. 
A4.3.8 
SECTION 8: Exposure controls/personal protection 
Within this guidance the term “occupational exposure limit(s)” refers to limits in the air of the workplace 
or biological limit values. In addition, for the purposes of this document “exposure control” means the full range of 
specific protection and prevention measures to be taken during use in order to minimize worker and environmental 
exposure. Engineering control measures that are needed to minimize exposure to, and risks associated with the hazards 
of, the substance or mixture should be included in this section. 
A4.3.8.1 
Control parameters 
A4.3.8.1.1 
Where available, list the occupational exposure limits (limits in the air of the workplace or biological 
limit values), including notations, for a substance and for each of the ingredients of a mixture. If air contaminants are 
formed when using the substance or mixture as intended available occupational exposure limits for these should also be 
listed. If an occupational exposure limit exists for the country or region in which the SDS is being supplied, this should 
be listed. The source of the occupational exposure limit should be stated on the SDS. When listing occupational exposure 
limits, use the chemical identity as specified in section 3 (Composition/Information on ingredients) of the SDS. 
A4.3.8.1.2 
Where available, list the biological limit values, including notations, for a substance and for each of the 
ingredients of a mixture. Where possible, the biological limit value should be relevant to the countries or regions in which 
the SDS is being supplied. The source of the biological limit value should be stated on the SDS. When listing biological 
limit values, use the chemical identity as specified in section 3 of the SDS. 
A4.3.8.1.3 
Where a control banding approach is recommended for providing protection in relation to specific uses 
then sufficient detail should be given to enable effective management of the risk. The context and limitations of the 
specific control banding recommendation should be made clear. 
A4.3.8.2 
Appropriate engineering controls 
The description of appropriate exposure control measures should relate to the intended modes of use of 
the substance or mixture. Sufficient information should be provided to enable a proper risk assessment to be carried out. 
Indicate when special engineering controls are necessary and specify which type. Examples include: 
(a) 
“maintain air concentrations below occupational exposure standards”, using engineering controls 
if necessary; 
(b) 
“use local exhaust ventilation when…”; 
(c) 
“use only in an enclosed system”; 
(d) 
“use only in spray paint booth or enclosure”; 
- 417 - 
(e) 
“use mechanical handling to reduce human contact with materials”; or 
(f) 
“use explosive dust handling controls”. 
The information provided here should complement that provided under section 7 (Handling and storage) 
of the SDS. 
A4.3.8.3 
Individual protection measures, such as personal protective equipment (PPE) 
A4.3.8.3.1 
Consistent with good occupational hygiene practices, personal protective equipment (PPE) should be 
used in conjunction with other control measures, including engineering controls, ventilation and isolation. See also section 
5 (Fire- fighting measures) of the SDS for specific fire/chemical PPE advice. 
A4.3.8.3.2 
Identify the PPE needed to minimize the potential for illness or injury due to exposure from the 
substance or mixture, including: 
(a) 
Eye/face protection: specify the type of eye protection and/or face shield required, based on the 
hazard of the substance or mixture and potential for contact; 
(b) 
Skin protection: specify the protective equipment to be worn (e.g. type of gloves, boots, bodysuit) 
based on the hazards associated with the substance or mixture and the potential for contact; 
(c) 
Respiratory protection: specify appropriate types of respiratory protection based on the hazard 
and potential for exposure, including air-purifying respirators and the proper purifying element 
(cartridge or canister) or breathing apparatus; and 
(d) 
Thermal hazards: when specifying protective equipment to be worn for materials that represent 
a thermal hazard, special consideration should be given to the construction of the PPE. 
A4.3.8.3.3 
Special requirements may exist for gloves or other protective clothing to prevent skin, eye or lung 
exposure. Where relevant, this type of PPE should be clearly stated. For example, “PVC gloves” or “nitrile rubber gloves”, 
and thickness and breakthrough time of the glove material. Special requirements may exist for respirators. 
A4.3.9 
SECTION 9: Physical and chemical properties 
A4.3.9.1 
This section of annex 4 provides guidance for SDS preparers and is provided for information purposes. 
This guidance does not prescribe how this information should be presented on the SDS. The guidance is divided into three 
tables as described below. 
A4.3.9.2 
Table A4.3.9.1 provides guidance on the physical and chemical properties specified by chapter 1.5, 
table 1.5.2. The SDS preparer should clearly describe/identify the physical and chemical properties specified in 
table 1.5.2. In cases where the specific physical and chemical properties required by table 1.5.2 do not apply or are not 
available under a particular subheading, this should be clearly indicated. 
A4.3.9.3 
Table A4.3.9.2 lists properties/safety characteristics and test results that are not required on the SDS but 
may be useful to communicate when a substance or mixture is classified in the respective physical hazard class. Data 
which is deemed relevant with regard to a specific physical hazard but not resulting in classification (e.g. negative test 
results close to the criterion) may also be useful to communicate. 
A4.3.9.4 
Table A4.3.9.3 lists further properties/safety characteristics and test results that are not required on the 
SDS but may be useful to communicate for a substance or mixture. Other physical properties/safety characteristics of the 
substance or mixture not identified in this table may also be useful to communicate. 
NOTE: 
The properties in tables A4.3.9.1, A4.3.9.2 and A4.3.9.3 may be presented with or without any division 
(that is, as a list). Also the order of the properties may be adjusted if deemed appropriate. 
A4.3.9.5 
Generally, the information given in this section of the SDS should relate to standard conditions for 
temperature and pressure (temperature of 20 °C and absolute pressure of 101.3 kPa). If other conditions apply, these 
should be indicated together with the respective property. 
A4.3.9.6 
Data on the SDS should be provided in appropriate units. Where the data relate to a hazard class, the 
units of measure should be as specified in the criteria for that hazard class. 
- 418 - 
A4.3.9.7 
If relevant for the interpretation of the information or numeric value given, indicate the determination 
method (e.g. open-cup/closed-cup for flash point) or state whether the value was calculated. 
A4.3.9.8 
In the case of a mixture, where valid data is available for the mixture as a whole, it should be provided. 
When data for the mixture as a whole cannot be provided, data for the most relevant ingredient(s) may be provided, and 
this data should clearly indicate to which ingredient(s) the data apply. 
A4.3.9.9 
Other appropriate physical or chemical parameters or safety characteristics, in addition to those listed 
below, may also be included in this section of the SDS. 
Table A4.3.9.1: Basic physical and chemical properties 
This table lists basic physical and chemical properties and safety characteristics. Relevant information 
as required should be indicated for every property listed in this table, such as a short description, value(s), unit, conditions 
(e.g. temperature, pressure), method, each as appropriate. 
If specific properties or safety characteristics do not apply (based on the respective information about 
applicability in the column “Remarks/Guidance”) they should still be listed in the SDS with the statement “not 
applicable”. 
If information on specific properties or safety characteristics is not available, they should still be listed 
in the SDS with the statement “not available”. It is recommended that, where appropriate, a short explanation is included 
as to why the data is not available, e.g. “melts”, “decomposes”, “dissolves”. 
Property 
Remarks/Guidance 
Physical state 
− generally at standard conditions 
− for definitions for gas, liquid and solid see chapter 1.2 
Colour 
− indicate the colour of the substance or mixture as supplied 
− in cases where one SDS is used to cover variants of a mixture which may have different 
colours the term 'various' can be used to describe the colour (see A4.3.1.1 for an SDS for 
variants of a mixture) 
Odour 
− give a qualitative description of the odour if it is well-known or described in the literature 
− if available, indicate the odour threshold (qualitatively or quantitatively) 
Melting point/ 
freezing point 
− not applicable to gases 
− at standard pressure 
− indicate up to which temperature no melting point was observed in case the melting point is 
above the measuring range of the method 
− indicate if decomposition or sublimation occurs prior to or during melting 
− for waxes and pastes the softening point/range may be indicated instead 
− for mixtures indicate if it is technically not possible to determine the melting point/freezing 
point 
Boiling point or 
initial boiling point 
and boiling range 
− generally at standard pressure (a boiling point at lower pressure might be indicated in case 
the boiling point is very high or decomposition occurs before boiling) 
− indicate up to which temperature no boiling point was observed in case the boiling point is 
above the measuring range of the method 
− indicate if decomposition occurs prior to or during boiling 
− for mixtures indicate if it is technically not possible to determine the boiling point or range; 
in that case indicate also the boiling point of the lowest boiling ingredient 
Flammability 
− applicable to gases, liquids and solids 
− indicate whether the substance or mixture is ignitable (capable of catching on fire or being 
set on fire, even if not classified for flammability) 
− if available and appropriate, further information may be indicated in addition, e.g. 
• whether the effect of ignition is other than a normal combustion (e.g. an explosion) 
• ignitability under non-standard conditions 
− more specific information on the flammability may be indicated based on the respective 
hazard classification in accordance with table A4.3.9.2 
- 419 - 
Table A4.3.9.1: Basic physical and chemical properties (cont’d) 
Property 
Remarks/Guidance 
Lower and upper 
explosion limit/ 
flammability limit 
− not applicable to solids 
− for flammable liquids indicate at least the lower explosion limit: 
• if the flash point is approximately > -25°C, it might be not possible to determine the 
upper explosion limit at standard temperature; in that case it is recommended to indicate 
the upper explosion limit at elevated temperature 
• if the flash point is > +20 °C the same holds for both the lower and upper explosion limit 
Note: 
Depending on the region of the world the term “explosion limit” or “flammability 
limit” is used but is supposed to mean the same. 
Flash point 
− not applicable to gases, aerosols and solids 
− for information on test methods etc., see chapter 2.6, paragraph 2.6.4.2 
for mixtures: 
− indicate a value for the mixture itself if available, otherwise indicate the flash point(s) of 
those substances with the lowest flash point(s) as these are generally the main contributing 
ones 
Auto-ignition 
temperature 
− applicable to gases and liquids only 
for mixtures: 
− indicate a value for the mixture itself if available, otherwise indicate the auto-ignition 
temperature(s) of those ingredients with the lowest auto-ignition temperature(s) 
Decomposition 
temperature 
− applicable to self-reactive substance and mixtures and organic peroxides and other substances 
and mixtures which may decompose 
− indicate 
• the SADT (self-accelerating decomposition temperature), together with the 
volume to which it applies or 
• the decomposition onset temperature (see also section 20.3.3.3 of the 
Manual of Tests and Criteria) 
− indicate whether the temperature given is the SADT or the decomposition onset temperature 
− if no decomposition was observed, indicate up to which temperature no decomposition was 
observed, e.g. as “no decomposition observed up to x °C/°F” 
pH 
− not applicable to gases 
− applicable to aqueous liquids and solutions (the pH is linked to aqueous media by definition; 
measurements carried out in other media do not give the pH) 
− indicate the concentration of the test substance in water 
− where the pH is ≤ 2 or ≥ 11.5, see table A4.3.9.3 for information on acid/alkaline reserve 
Kinematic viscosity 
− applicable to liquids only 
− use preferably mm2/s as unit (as the classification criteria for the hazard class aspiration 
hazard are based on this unit) 
− the dynamic viscosity may be indicated in addition. The kinematic viscosity is linked to the 
dynamic viscosity by the density: 
)
(g/cm
Density 
s)
(mPa
 
 viscosity
Dynamic
)
s
/
(mm
 
 viscosity
Kinematic
3
2

=
 
− for non-Newtonian liquids, indicate thixotropic or rheopexic behaviour 
Solubility 
− generally at standard temperature 
− indicate the solubility in water 
− the solubility in other (non-polar) solvents may also be included 
− for mixtures, indicate if it is fully or only partially soluble in or miscible with water or other 
solvent 
Partition coefficient 
n-octanol/water 
(log value) 
− not applicable to inorganic and ionic liquids 
− generally not applicable to mixtures 
− may be calculated (using QSAR – Quantitative structure-activity relationship) 
− indicate whether the value is based on testing or on calculation 
- 420 - 
Table A4.3.9.1: Basic physical and chemical properties (cont’d) 
Property 
Remarks/Guidance 
Vapour pressure 
− generally at standard temperature 
− indicate the vapour pressure at 50°C for volatile fluids in addition (in order to enable 
distinction between gases and liquids based on the definitions in chapter 1.2) 
− in cases where one SDS is used to cover variants of a liquid mixture or liquefied gas mixture 
indicate a range for the vapour pressure 
− for liquid mixtures or liquefied gas mixtures, indicate a range for the vapour pressure or at 
least the vapour pressure of the most volatile ingredient(s) where the vapour pressure of the 
mixture is predominantly determined by this/these ingredient(s) 
− for liquid mixtures or liquefied gas mixtures, the vapour pressure may be calculated using 
the activity coefficients of the ingredients 
− the saturated vapour concentration (SVC) in ml/m3 or in g/m3 (=mg/l) may be indicated in 
addition. The saturated vapour concentration can be estimated as follows: 
SVC in ml/m3: SVC = VP ∙ c1 
SVC in g/m3: SVC = VP ∙ MW ∙ c2 
where 
• VP is the vapour pressure in hPa (=mbar) 
• MW is the molecular weight in g/mol and 
• c1 and c2 are conversion factors where c1 = 987.2 ml/(m3∙hPa) and 
c2 = 0.0412 mol/(m3∙hPa) 
Density and/or 
relative density 
− applicable to liquids and solids only 
− generally at standard conditions 
− indicate as appropriate 
• the absolute density and/or 
• the relative density based on water at 4°C as reference (sometimes also 
called the specific gravity) 
− a range may be indicated in cases where variations in density are possible, e.g. due to batch 
manufacture, or where one SDS is used to cover several variants of a substance or mixture 
NOTE: For clarity, the SDS should indicate if absolute density (indicate units) and/or relative 
density (no units) is being reported. 
Relative vapour 
density 
− applicable to gases and liquids only 
− for gases, indicate the relative density of the gas based on air at 20 °C as reference (=MW/29) 
− for liquids, indicate the relative vapour density based on air at 20 °C as reference (=MW/29) 
− for liquids, the relative density (Dm) of the vapour/air-mixture at 20 °C (air = 1) may be 
indicated in addition. It can be calculated as follows: 
Dm = 1 + (VP20 ∙ (MW – Mwair) ∙ c3 
where 
• VP20 is the vapour pressure at 20 °C in hPa (=mbar) 
• MW is the molecular weight in g/mol 
• MWair is the molecular weight of air, MWair = 29 g/mol 
• c3 is a conversion factor, 𝑐𝑐3 = 34 ∙10−6 
mol
g∙hPa 
Particle 
characteristics 
− applicable to solids only 
− indicate the particle size (median and range) 
− if available and appropriate, further properties may be indicated in addition, e.g. 
• size distribution (range) 
• shape and aspect ratio 
• specific surface area 
- 421 - 
Table A4.3.9.2: Data relevant with regard to physical hazard classes (supplemental) 
This table lists properties/safety characteristics and test results that are not required on the SDS but may 
be useful to communicate when a substance or mixture is classified in the respective physical hazard class. Data which is 
deemed relevant with regard to a specific physical hazard but not resulting in classification (e.g. negative test results close 
to the criterion) may also be useful to communicate. Include any relevant information, such as a short description, value(s), 
unit, conditions (e.g. temperature, pressure), method, each as appropriate. 
The name of the hazard class the data relates to may be indicated together with the data but it is not 
necessary to do so because the resulting classification is already indicated in section 2 of the SDS. Thus, the data may be 
listed in the same way as the data according to table A4.3.9.1. 
Unless otherwise specified, the test methods referred to in this table are described in the Manual of Tests 
and Criteria. 
Chapter 
Hazard class 
Property/Safety characteristic/Test result and 
Remarks/Guidance 
2.1 
Explosives 
− indicate the sensitivity to shock, generally determined by the UN gap test: test 1 (a) 
and/or test 2 (a) (section 11.4 or 12.4 of the Manual of Tests and Criteria) (indicate at 
least + or −) 
− indicate the effect of heating under confinement, generally determined by the Koenen 
test: test 1 (b) and/or test 2 (b) (section 11.5 or 12.5 of the Manual of Tests and 
Criteria) (indicate preferably the limiting diameter) 
− indicate the effect of ignition under confinement, generally determined by test 1 (c) 
and/or test 2 (c) (section 11.6 or 12.6 of the Manual of Tests and Criteria) (indicate at 
least + or −) 
− indicate the sensitiveness to impact, generally determined by test 3 (a) (section 13.4 
of the Manual of Tests and Criteria) (indicate preferably the limiting impact energy) 
− indicate the sensitiveness to friction, generally determined by test 3 (b) (section 13.5 of 
the Manual of Tests and Criteria) (indicate preferably the limiting load) 
− indicate the thermal stability, generally determined by test 3 (c) (section 13.6 of the 
Manual of Tests and Criteria) (indicate at least + or −) 
− in addition, this entry is also applicable to substances and mixtures which are 
exempted based on note 2 in chapter 2.1, section 2.1.3 and to other substances and 
mixtures which show a positive effect if heated under confinement 
− indicate the package (type, size, net mass of substance or mixture) based on which the 
division was assigned or based on which the substance or mixture was exempted 
2.2 
Flammable 
gases 
for pure flammable gases: 
− no data on the explosion/flammability limits is needed because these are indicated 
based on table A4.3.9.1 
− indicate the TCi (maximum content of flammable gas which, when mixed with 
nitrogen, is not flammable in air, in %) as per ISO 10156 
− indicate the fundamental burning velocity if the gas is classified as Category 1B based 
on fundamental burning velocity, generally determined by ISO 817:2014, Annex C 
for flammable gas mixtures: 
− indicate the explosion/flammability limits, if tested, or indicate whether the 
classification and category assignment is based on the calculation as per ISO 10156 
− indicate the fundamental burning velocity if the gas mixture is classified as Category 
1B based on fundamental burning velocity, generally determined by ISO 817:2014, 
Annex C 
2.3, 
section 
2.3.1 
Aerosols 
− indicate the total percentage (by mass) of flammable components unless the Aerosol 
is classified as Aerosol cat. 1 because it contains more than 1 % flammable 
components or has a heat of combustion of at least 20 kJ/g and is not submitted to the 
flammability classification procedures (see note 2 in chapter 2.3, 2.3.1.2.1) 
2.3, 
section 
2.3.2 
Chemicals under 
pressure 
− indicate the total percentage (by mass) of flammable components 
− indicate the specific heat of combustion (generally in kJ/g) 
- 422 - 
Table A4.3.9.2: Data relevant with regard to physical hazard classes (supplemental) (cont’d) 
Chapter 
Hazard class 
Property/Safety characteristic/Test result and 
Remarks/Guidance 
2.4 
Oxidizing gases 
for pure oxidizing gases: 
− indicate the Ci (coefficient of oxygen equivalency) as per ISO 10156 
for oxidizing gas mixtures: 
− indicate “Oxidizing gas Category 1 (tested as per ISO 10156)” for tested mixtures or 
indicate the calculated oxidizing power (OP) as per ISO 10156 
2.5 
Gases under 
pressure 
for pure gases: 
− indicate the critical temperature 
for gas mixtures: 
− indicate the pseudo-critical temperature; it is estimated as the mole weighted average 
of the critical temperatures of the components as follows: 
=

n
1
i
i
Crit
i T
x
 
where 
• xi is molar fraction of component i 
• TCrit i is the critical temperature of component i 
2.6 
Flammable 
liquids 
− no additional data is needed because the boiling point and the flash point are 
indicated based on table A4.3.9.1 
− indicate information on sustained combustibility if exemption based on Test L.2 
(section 32.5.2 of the Manual of Tests and Criteria), in accordance with note 2 in 
chapter 2.6, section 2.6.2, is considered 
2.7 
Flammable 
solids 
− indicate the burning rate (or burning time for metal powders), generally determined 
by Test N.1 (section 33.2.1 of the Manual of Tests and Criteria) 
− indicate whether the wetted zone has been passed or not 
2.8 
Self-reactive 
substances and 
mixtures 
− for the SADT (self-accelerating decomposition temperature), see the entry for the 
decomposition temperature in table A4.3.9.1 
− indicate the decomposition energy (value and method of determination) 
− indicate detonation properties (Yes/Partial/No), also in packaging where relevant 
− indicate deflagration properties (Yes rapidly/Yes slowly/No), also in packaging 
where relevant 
− indicate the effect of heating under confinement (Violent/Medium/Low/No), also in 
packaging where relevant 
− indicate the explosive power if applicable (Not low/Low/None) 
2.9 
Pyrophoric 
liquids 
− indicate whether spontaneous ignition or charring of the filter paper occurs, 
generally determined by Test N.3 (section 33.3.1.5 of the Manual of Tests and 
Criteria) (indicate e.g. “the liquid ignites spontaneously in air” or “a filter paper 
with the liquid chars in air”) 
2.10 
Pyrophoric 
solids 
− indicate whether spontaneous ignition occurs when poured or within five minutes 
thereafter, generally determined by Test N.2 (section 33.3.1.4 of the Manual of Tests 
and Criteria) (e.g. “the solid ignites spontaneously in air”) 
− indicate whether pyrophoric properties could be altered over time, e.g. by formation 
of a protective surface layer through slow oxidation 
2.11 
Self-heating 
substances and 
mixtures 
− indicate whether spontaneous ignition occurs, include possible screening data and/or 
method used (generally Test N.4, section 33.3.1.6 of the Manual of Tests and 
Criteria) and note the maximum temperature rise obtained 
− indicate the results of screening tests according to chapter 2.11, paragraph 2.11.4.2, 
if relevant and available 
2.12 
Substances and 
mixtures which, 
in contact with 
water, emit 
flammable gases 
− indicate the identity of the emitted gas, if known 
− indicate whether the emitted gas ignites spontaneously 
− indicate the gas evolution rate, generally determined by Test N.5 (section 33.4.1.4 of 
the Manual of Tests and Criteria), unless the test has not been completed e.g. 
because the gas ignites spontaneously 
- 423 - 
Table A4.3.9.2: Data relevant with regard to physical hazard classes (supplemental) (cont’d) 
Chapter 
Hazard class 
Property/Safety characteristic/Test result and 
Remarks/Guidance 
2.13 
Oxidizing 
liquids 
− indicate whether spontaneous ignition occurs when mixed with cellulose, generally 
determined by Test O.2 (section 34.4.2 of the Manual of Tests and Criteria) (e.g. 
“the mixture with cellulose (prepared for Test O.2) ignites spontaneously”) 
2.14 
Oxidizing solids 
− indicate whether spontaneous ignition occurs when mixed with cellulose, generally 
determined by Test O.1 or Test O.3 (sections 34.4.1 or 34.4.3 of the Manual of Tests 
and Criteria) (e.g. “the mixture with cellulose (prepared for Test O.1 or O.3) ignites 
spontaneously”) 
2.15 
Organic 
peroxides 
− for the SADT (self-accelerating decomposition temperature) see the entry for the 
decomposition energy in table A4.3.9.1 
− indicate the decomposition energy (value and method of determination), if available 
− indicate detonation properties (Yes/Partial/No), also in packaging where relevant 
− indicate deflagration properties (Yes rapidly/Yes slowly/No), also in packaging 
where relevant 
− indicate the effect of heating under confinement (Violent/Medium/Low/No), also in 
packaging where relevant 
− indicate the explosive power if applicable (Not low/Low/None) 
2.16 
Corrosive to 
metals 
− indicate which metals are corroded by the substance or mixture (e.g. “corrosive to 
aluminium” or “corrosive to steel” etc.), if available 
− indicate the corrosion rate and whether it refers to steel or aluminium, generally 
determined by Test C.1 (section 37.4 of the Manual of Tests and Criteria), if 
available 
− include a reference to other sections of the SDS with regard to compatible or 
incompatible materials (e.g. to packaging compatibilities in section 7 or to 
incompatible materials in section 10), as appropriate 
2.17 
Desensitized 
explosives 
− indicate what desensitizing agent is used 
− indicate the exothermic decomposition energy 
− indicate the corrected burning rate Ac 
- 424 - 
Table A4.3.9.3: Further safety characteristics (supplemental) 
This table lists further properties/safety characteristics and test results that are not required on the SDS 
but may be useful to communicate for a substance or mixture. Other physical properties/safety characteristics of the 
substance or mixture not identified in this table may also be useful to communicate. Include all relevant information, such 
as a short description, value(s), unit, conditions (e.g. temperature, pressure), method, each as appropriate. 
Safety characteristic 
and/or test result 
Remarks/Guidance 
Mechanical sensitivity 
− applicable to energetic substances and mixtures with an exothermic decomposition 
energy ≥ 500 J/g in accordance with the Manual of Tests and Criteria, appendix 6, 
section 3.3 (c) 
− indicate the sensitiveness to impact, generally determined by test 3 (a) (section 13.4 of 
the Manual of Tests and Criteria) (indicate preferably the limiting impact energy) 
− indicate the sensitiveness to friction, generally determined by test 3 (b) (section 13.5 of 
the Manual of Tests and Criteria) (indicate preferably the limiting load) 
SAPT (self-accelerating 
polymerization 
temperature) 
− applicable to substances and mixtures which may self-polymerize thereby generating 
dangerous amounts of heat and gas or vapour 
− indicate the volume for which the SAPT is given 
Formation of explosible 
dust/air mixtures 
− not applicable to gases and liquids 
− not applicable to solids containing only substances which are fully oxidized (e.g. 
silicon dioxide) 
− in case formation of explosible dust/air mixtures might be possible based on section 2 
of the SDS, relevant safety characteristics may be indicated in addition, such as 
• 
lower explosion limit / minimum explosible concentration 
• 
minimum ignition energy 
• 
deflagration index (Kst) 
• 
maximum explosion pressure 
− indicate the particle characteristics to which the data apply if different from the particle 
characteristics as indicated based on table A4.3.9.1 
NOTE 1: The ability to form explosible dust/air mixtures may be determined e.g. by 
VDI 2263-1 "Dust Fires and Dust Explosions; Hazards - Assessment - Protective 
Measures; Test Methods for the Determination of the Safety Characteristics of Dusts" or 
by ISO/IEC 80079-20-2 "Explosive atmospheres - Part 20-2: Material characteristics - 
Combustible dusts test methods" (in preparation). 
NOTE 2: Explosion characteristics are specific for the tested dust. Normally they cannot 
be transferred to other dusts even if these are comparable. Fine-sized dusts of a particular 
substance tend to react stronger than coarser dusts. 
Acid/alkaline reserve 
− applicable to substances and mixtures which have an extreme pH (pH ≤ 2 or ≥ 11.5) 
− indicate acid/alkaline reserve when used for evaluating skin and eye hazards 
- 425 - 
A4.3.10 
SECTION 10: Stability and reactivity 
A4.3.10.1 
Reactivity 
A4.3.10.1.1 
Describe the reactivity hazards of the substance or mixture in this section. Provide specific test data for 
the substance or mixture as a whole, where available. However, the information may also be based on general data for 
the class or family of chemical if such data adequately represent the anticipated hazard of the substance or mixture. 
A4.3.10.1.2 
If data for mixtures are not available, ingredient data should be provided. In determining 
incompatibility, consider the substances, containers and contaminants that the substance or mixture might be exposed to 
during transportation, storage and use. 
A4.3.10.2 
Chemical stability 
Indicate if the substance or mixture is stable or unstable under normal ambient and anticipated storage 
and handling conditions of temperature and pressure. Describe any stabilizers which are, or may need to be, used to 
maintain the product. Indicate the safety significance of any change in the physical appearance of the product. 
A4.3.10.3 
Possibility of hazardous reactions 
If relevant, state if the substance or mixture will react or polymerize, releasing excess pressure or heat, 
or creating other hazardous conditions. Describe under what conditions the hazardous reactions may occur. 
A4.3.10.4 
Conditions to avoid 
List conditions such as heat, pressure, shock, static discharge, vibrations or other physical stresses that 
might result in a hazardous situation. 
A4.3.10.5 
Incompatible materials 
List classes of chemicals or specific substances with which the substance or mixture could react to 
produce a hazardous situation (e.g. explosion, release of toxic or flammable materials, liberation of excessive heat). 
A4.3.10.6 
Hazardous decomposition products 
List known and reasonably anticipated hazardous decomposition products produced as a result of use, 
storage and heating. Hazardous combustion products should be included in section 5 (Fire-fighting measures) of the SDS. 
A4.3.11 
SECTION 11: Toxicological information 
A4.3.11.1 
This section is used primarily by medical professionals, occupational health and safety professionals 
and toxicologists. A concise but complete and comprehensible description of the various toxicological (health) effects, 
and the available data used to identify those effects, should be provided. Under GHS classification, the relevant hazards, 
for which data should be provided, are: 
(a) 
acute toxicity; 
(b) 
skin corrosion/irritation; 
(c) 
serious eye damage/irritation; 
(d) 
respiratory or skin sensitization; 
(e) 
germ cell mutagenicity; 
(f) 
carcinogenicity; 
(g) 
reproductive toxicity; 
(h) 
STOT-single exposure; 
- 426 - 
(i) 
STOT-repeated exposure; and 
(j) 
aspiration hazard. 
These hazards should always be listed on the SDS. 
A4.3.11.2 
The health effects included in the SDS should be consistent with those described in the studies used for 
the classification of the substance or mixture. 
A4.3.11.3 
Where there is a substantial amount of test data on the substance or mixture, it may be desirable to 
summarize results e.g. by route of exposure (see A4.3.11.1). 
A4.3.11.4 
The data included in this subsection should apply to the substance or mixture as used. The toxicological 
data should describe the mixture. If that information is not available, the classification under GHS and the toxicological 
properties of the hazardous ingredients should be provided. 
A4.3.11.5 
General statements such as “Toxic” with no supporting data or “Safe if properly used” are not acceptable 
as they may be misleading and do not provide a description of health effects. Phrases such as “not applicable”, “not 
relevant”, or leaving blank spaces in the health effects section can lead to confusion and misunderstanding and should not 
be used. For health effects where information is not available, this should be clearly stated. Health effects should be 
described accurately and relevant distinctions made. For example, allergic contact dermatitis and irritant contact 
dermatitis should be distinguished from each other. 
A4.3.11.6 
If data for any of these hazards are not available, they should still be listed on the SDS with a statement 
that data are not available. Also provide information on the relevant negative data (see A4.2.2.3). If data are available 
showing that the substance or mixture does not meet the criteria for classification, it should be stated on the SDS that the 
substance or mixture has been evaluated and based on available data, does not meet the classification criteria. 
Additionally, if a substance or mixture is found to be not classified for other reasons, for example, due to technical 
impossibility to obtain data, or inconclusive data, this should be clearly stated on the SDS. 
A4.3.11.7 
Information on the likely routes of exposure 
Provide information on the likely routes of exposure and the effects of the substance or mixture via each 
possible route of exposure, that is, through ingestion (swallowing), inhalation or skin/eye exposure. A statement should 
be made if health effects are not known. 
A4.3.11.8 
Symptoms related to the physical, chemical and toxicological characteristics 
Describe the potential adverse health effects and symptoms associated with exposure to the substance 
or mixture and its ingredients or known by-products. Provide information on the symptoms related to the physical, 
chemical and toxicological characteristics of the substance or mixture following exposure related to the intended uses. 
Describe the first symptoms at the lowest exposures through to the consequences of severe exposure; for example, 
“headaches and dizziness may occur, proceeding to fainting or unconsciousness; large doses may result in coma and 
death”. 
A4.3.11.9 
Delayed and immediate effects and also chronic effects from short- and long-term exposure 
Provide information on whether delayed or immediate effects can be expected after short- or long-term 
exposure. Also provide information on acute and chronic health effects relating to human exposure to the substance or 
mixture. Where human data are not available, animal data should be summarised, and the species clearly identified. It 
should be indicated in the SDS whether toxicological data is based on human or animal data. 
A4.3.11.10 
Numerical measures of toxicity (such as acute toxicity estimates) 
Provide information on the dose, concentration or conditions of exposure that may cause adverse health 
effects. Where appropriate, doses should be linked to symptoms and effects, including the period of exposure likely to 
cause harm. 
A4.3.11.11 
Interactive effects 
Information on interactions should be included if relevant and readily available. 
- 427 - 
A4.3.11.12 
Where specific chemical data are not available 
It may not always be possible to obtain information on the hazards of a substance or mixture. In cases 
where data on the specific substance or mixture are not available, data on the chemical class, if appropriate, may be used. 
Where generic data are used or where data are not available, this should be stated clearly in the SDS. 
A4.3.11.13 
Mixtures 
If a mixture has not been tested for its health effects as a whole then information on each ingredient 
listed under A4.3.3.2.1 should be provided and the mixture should be classified using the processes that are described in 
the GHS (section 1.3.2.3 and subsequent chapters). 
A4.3.11.14 
Mixture versus ingredient information 
A4.3.11.14.1 
Ingredients may interact with each other in the body resulting in different rates of absorption, 
metabolism and excretion. As a result, the toxic actions may be altered, and the overall toxicity of the mixture may be 
different from its ingredients. 
A4.3.11.14.2 
It is necessary to consider whether the concentration of each ingredient is sufficient to contribute to the 
overall health effects of the mixture. The information on toxic effects should be presented for each ingredient, except: 
(a) 
if the information is duplicated, it is not necessary to list this more than once. For example, if 
two ingredients both cause vomiting and diarrhoea, it is not necessary to list this twice. Overall, 
the mixture is described as causing vomiting and diarrhoea; 
(b) 
if it is unlikely that these effects will occur at the concentrations present. For example, when a 
mild irritant is diluted in a non-irritating solution, there comes a point where the overall mixture 
would be unlikely to cause irritation; 
(c) 
Predicting the interactions between ingredients is extremely difficult, and where information on 
interactions is not available, assumptions should not be made and instead the health effects of 
each ingredient should be listed separately. 
A4.3.11.15 
Other information 
Other relevant information on adverse health effects should be included even when not required by the 
GHS classification criteria. 
A4.3.12 
SECTION 12: Ecological information 
A4.3.12.1 
The information that shall be provided in this section is to enable evaluation of the environmental impact 
of the substance or mixture if it were released to the environment. This information can assist in handling spills, and 
evaluating waste treatment practices, control of release, accidental release measures, and transport. 
A4.3.12.2 
A concise but complete and comprehensible description of the various ecotoxicological (environment) 
properties, and the available data used to identify those properties, should be provided. The basic properties, for which 
data should be provided, are: 
(a) 
Toxicity; 
(b) 
Persistence and degradability; 
(c) 
Bioaccumulative potential; 
(d) 
Mobility in soil; 
(e) 
Other adverse effects. 
These properties should always be listed on the SDS. Species, media, units, test duration and test 
conditions should be clearly indicated. (If data for any of these properties are not available, they should still be listed on 
the SDS with a statement that data are not available). 
- 428 - 
A4.3.12.3 
Some ecotoxicological properties are substance specific, i.e. bioaccumulation, persistence and 
degradability. The information should therefore be given, where available and appropriate, for each relevant ingredient 
of the mixture (i.e. those which are required to be listed in section 3 of the SDS). 
A4.3.12.4 
Provide also a short summary of the data given under A4.3.12.5 to A4.3.12.9 in relation to the hazard 
classification criteria. Where data are not available for classification, this should be clearly stated on the SDS for each 
basic property concerned. Additionally, if data are available showing that the substance or mixture does not meet the 
criteria for classification, it should be stated on the SDS that the substance or mixture has been evaluated and, based on 
available data, does not meet the classification criteria. Additionally, if a substance or mixture is found to be not classified 
for other reasons, for example, due to technical impossibility to obtain the data, or inconclusive data, this should be clearly 
stated on the SDS. 
A4.3.12.5 
Toxicity 
Information on toxicity can be provided using data from tests performed on aquatic and/or terrestrial 
organisms. This should include relevant available data on both acute and chronic aquatic toxicity for fish, crustaceans, 
algae and other aquatic plants. In addition, toxicity data on other organisms (including soil micro-and macro-organisms) 
such as birds, bees and plants, should be included when available. Where the substance or mixture has inhibitory effects 
on the activity of micro-organisms, the possible impact on sewage treatment plants should be mentioned. 
A4.3.12.6 
Persistence and degradability 
Persistence and degradability is the potential for the substance or the appropriate constituents of a 
mixture to degrade in the environment, either through biodegradation or other processes, such as oxidation or hydrolysis. 
Test results relevant to assess persistence and degradability should be given where available. If degradation half-lives are 
quoted it must be indicated whether these half-lives refer to mineralization or to primary degradation. The potential of the 
substance or certain constituents (see also A4.3.12.8) of a mixture to degrade in sewage treatment plants should also be 
mentioned. 
A4.3.12.7 
Bioaccumulative potential 
Bioaccumulation is the potential for the substance or certain constituents of a mixture to accumulate in 
biota and, possibly, pass through the food chain. Test results relevant to assess the bioaccumulative potential should be 
given. This should include reference to the octanol-water partition coefficient (Kow) and bioconcentration factor (BCF), 
if available. 
A4.3.12.8 
Mobility in soil 
Mobility in soil is the potential of a substance or the constituents of a mixture, if released to the 
environment, to move under natural forces to the groundwater or to a distance from the site of release. The potential for 
mobility in soil should be given where available. Information on mobility can be determined from relevant mobility data 
such as adsorption studies or leaching studies. For example, Koc values can be predicted from octanol/water partition 
coefficients (Kow). Leaching and mobility can be predicted from models. 
NOTE: 
Where real data on the substance or mixture is available this data will take precedence over models 
and predictions. 
A4.3.12.9 
Other adverse effects 
Information on any other adverse effects to the environment should be included where available, such 
as environmental fate (exposure), ozone depletion potential, photochemical ozone creation potential, endocrine disrupting 
potential and/or global warming potential. 
A4.3.13 
SECTION 13: Disposal considerations 
A4.3.13.1 
Disposal methods 
A4.3.13.1.1 
Provide information for proper disposal, recycling or reclamation of the substance or mixture and/or its 
container to assist in the determination of safe and environmentally preferred waste management options, consistent with 
the requirements of the national competent authority. For the safety of persons conducting disposal, recycling or 
reclamation activities, please refer to the information in section 8 (exposure controls and personal protection) of the SDS. 
- 429 - 
A4.3.13.1.2 
Specify disposal containers and methods. 
A4.3.13.1.3 
Discuss physical/chemical properties that may affect disposal options. 
A4.3.13.1.4 
Discourage sewage disposal. 
A4.3.13.1.5 
Where appropriate, identify any special precautions for incineration or landfill. 
A4.3.14 
SECTION 14: Transport information 
This section provides basic classification information for the transporting/shipment of a hazardous 
substance or mixture by road, rail, sea or air. Where information is not available or relevant this should be stated. 
A4.3.14.1 
UN Number 
Provide the UN Number (i.e. four-figure identification number of the substance or article) from the UN 
Model Regulations 4. 
A4.3.14.2 
UN Proper Shipping Name 
Provide the UN proper shipping name from the UN Model Regulations. For substances or mixtures the 
UN proper shipping name should be provided in this subsection if it has not appeared as the GHS product identifier or 
national or regional identifiers. 
A4.3.14.3 
Transport hazard class(es) 
Provide the transport class (and subsidiary risks) assigned to the substances or mixtures according to 
the most predominant hazard that they present in accordance with the UN Model Regulations. 
A4.3.14.4 
Packing group, if applicable 
Provide the packing group number from the UN Model Regulations, if applicable. The packing group 
number is assigned to certain substances in accordance with their degree of hazard. 
A4.3.14.5 
Environmental hazards 
Indicate whether the substance or mixture is a known marine pollutant according to the IMDG Code, 
and if so, whether it is a “marine pollutant” or a “severe marine pollutant”. Also indicate whether the substance or mixture 
is environmentally hazardous according to the UN Model Regulations, ADR, RID and ADN. 
A4.3.14.6 
Special precautions for user 
Provide information on any special precautions, which a user needs to be aware of, or needs to comply 
with in connection with transport. 
A4.3.14.7 
Transport in bulk according to IMO instruments 
This subsection only applies when cargoes are intended to be carried in bulk according to IMO 
instruments: e.g. chapter VI or VII of SOLAS Annex II or Annex V of MARPOL, the IBC Code, the IMSBC Code and 
the IGC Code (or earlier versions, i.e.: EGC Code or GC Code). 
For liquid bulk cargoes, provide the product name (if name is different to that given in A4.3.1.1) as 
required by the shipment document and in accordance with the name used in the lists of product names given in chapters 
17 or 18 of the IBC Code or the latest edition of the IMO’s MEPC.2/Circular. Indicate ship type required and pollution 
category. 
For solid bulk cargoes, provide the bulk cargo shipping name, whether or not the cargo is considered 
harmful to the marine environment (HME) according to MARPOL Annex V, whether it is a material hazardous only in 
bulk (MHB) according to the IMSBC Code, and which group it should be shipped according to the IMSBC. 
For liquefied gas cargoes in bulk provide the product name and ship type according to the IGC Code 
(or earlier versions, i.e.: EGC Code or GC Code). 
- 430 - 
A4.3.15 
SECTION 15: Regulatory information 
Describe any other regulatory information on the substance or mixture that is not provided elsewhere 
in the SDS (e.g. whether the substance or mixture is subject to the Montreal Protocol, the Stockholm Convention or the 
Rotterdam Convention). 
A4.3.15.1 
Safety, health and environmental regulations specific for the product in question 
Provide relevant national and/or regional information on the regulatory status of the substance or 
mixture (including its ingredients) under relevant safety, health and environmental regulations. This should include 
whether the substance is subject to any prohibitions or restrictions in the country or region into which it is being supplied. 
A4.3.16 
SECTION 16: Other information 
Provide information relevant to the preparation of the SDS in this section. This should incorporate other 
information that does not belong in sections 1 to 15 of the SDS, including information on preparation and revision of the 
SDS such as: 
(a) 
the date of preparation of the latest revision of the SDS. When revisions are made to an SDS, 
unless it has been indicated elsewhere, clearly indicate where the changes have been made to the 
previous version of the SDS. Suppliers should maintain an explanation of the changes and be 
willing to provide it upon request; 
(b) 
a key/legend to abbreviations and acronyms used in the SDS; and 
(c) 
key literature references and sources for data used to compile the SDS. 
NOTE: 
While references are not necessary in SDS’s, references may be included in this section if desired. 
- 431 - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 5 
 
CONSUMER PRODUCT LABELLING 
BASED ON THE LIKELIHOOD OF 
INJURY 
- 433 - 
ANNEX 5 
CONSUMER PRODUCT LABELLING BASED 
ON THE LIKELIHOOD OF INJURY 
A5.1 
Introduction 
A5.1.1 
The Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals is based on an 
assessment of the intrinsic hazardous properties of the chemicals involved. However, it has been recognized that some 
systems provide information about chronic health hazards in consumer products only after considering additional data 
regarding potential exposures to consumers under normal conditions of use or foreseeable misuse. These systems thus 
provide information based on an assessment of risk, or the likelihood of injury occurring from exposure to these products. 
Where this exposure assessment and determination of likelihood of injury reveal that the potential for harm to occur as a 
result of the expected exposures is insignificant, chronic health hazards may not be included on the product label for 
consumer use. This type of system was recognized in a paper clarifying the scope of the GHS work in 19981: 
“The application of the components of the system may vary by type of product or stage of the life cycle. Once a chemical 
is classified, the likelihood of adverse effects may be considered in deciding what informational or other steps should be 
taken for a given product or use setting”. 
A5.1.2 
The work on the GHS has not addressed harmonization of this type of approach. Therefore, specific 
procedures to apply this approach would have to be developed and applied by the competent authority. However, in 
recognition that it is an approach that has been used, and will continue to be used in the future, this annex is being provided 
to give additional guidance on how such an approach may work in practice. 
A5.1.3 
Exposure assessments for some consumer products are used to determine what information is included 
on a label in this type of approach. Regulators and manufacturers obtain exposure data or generate hypothetical exposure 
data based on customary use or foreseeable misuse. These assumptions are then used to determine whether a chronic 
health hazard is included on a consumer product label, and what precautions are to be followed, under a risk-based 
approach. These decisions are thus made on the basis of considerations regarding the likelihood of harm occurring in the 
consumer exposure situations that have been identified. 
A5.1.4 
Consumer product labels in some systems are based on a combination of hazard and risk. However, 
acute and physical hazards may be indicated on the label, while chronic health effects labelling based on risk is not 
indicated. This may be due in part to the expectation that exposures to some consumer products are of short duration, and 
thus may not be sufficient to lead to the development of chronic health effects as a result of those exposures. These 
expectations may not be accurate where consumer products are used in a workplace, e.g. paints or adhesives used by 
construction workers on a regular basis 
A5.1.5 
While intrinsic hazards of a chemical can be determined for all sectors, information about exposure, and 
thus risk, varies significantly among the sectors covered by the GHS. The vehicle by which this information is then 
transmitted to the user also varies. In some cases, particularly in the consumer setting, the label is the sole source of 
information, while in others, especially the workplace, it is one piece of a comprehensive system, supplemented by SDS’s 
and worker training. In transport, a label transmits the primary information, but additional information is provided by the 
transport documentation. 
A5.2 
General principles 
A5.2.1 
While the specific risk assessment approach has not been addressed or harmonized in the GHS, certain 
general principles are as follows: 
(a) 
All chemicals should be classified based on GHS classification criteria 
The first step in the process of classifying hazards and communicating information should always 
be classification of intrinsic hazards based on the GHS criteria for substances and mixtures; 
 
1 
IOMC Description and Further Clarification of the Anticipated Application of the Globally Harmonized System 
(GHS), IFCS/ISG3/98.32B. 
